# IoT-Enabled-Weather-Station-with-ML-Forecasting

This project is comprised of two separate but cooperating parts: the weather station itself, as well as its accompanying software, and the machine learning algorithms that allow for short-term forecasting. The original intent of the project was to make rudimentary weather predictions (the next day's high and low temperatures as well as some sort of precipitation prediction) based on data collected from my own constructed weather station - so without the use of radar and upper atmosphere data that is standard in modern forecasting methods. Despite these limitations, the forecasting capabilities of this system are reasonably accurate with the temperature predictions consistently within 2 to 3 degrees Fahrenheit of the actual next day temperatures (interestingly, the prediction for the next day's low temperature is consistently more accurate than the high prediction). Resulting from this project along with the daily next-day forecast, which is automatically emailed to set recipients each morning, is the data visualization dashboard provided by the Arduino Cloud service that allows in-depth weather monitoring. An example of this dashboard is included in this repository.

## Obtaining Data
The components of the weather station are: 
  1. A sealed plastic box that houses the Arduino Nano 33 IoT, all of the wiring necessary for proper data collection by the Arduino program, and two of the seven sensors -         the BH1750 light sensor and the GUVA-S12SD UV sensor.
  2. A wind-rain assembly that was purchased off the shelf and is intended to be used as a replacement part for a consumer weather station. This assembly includes an                 anemometer, a wind vane, and a tipping bucket style rain gauge.
  3. A soil temperature probe which is connected to the Arduino Nano through a cable gland in the plastic box.
  4. A Stevenson screen that protects a BME280 from precipitation and direct sunlight, allowing it to accurately measure temperature, pressure, and humidity.

An important consideration in the Arduino program being run on the weather station is the use of interrupt service routines for the collection of wind speed and precipitation data. The anemometer sends a signal two times in a full rotation and it is this accumulated count per duration of time that allows a wind speed to be calculated (using an equivalence reported on the data sheet). The rain gauge works similarly, sending a signal each time the bucket tips from the weight of collected rain. The attachment of interrupts to the input pins of these devices allows their signals to be received and their associated counts incremented regardless of what the program happens to be doing at that moment. All other seemingly peculiar things in the Arduino program are addressed by comments throughout the code itself.

## Training the Machine Learning Models
The next-day predictions are provided by three separate machine learning models - high temp, low temp, and yes/no for measurable precipitation. The basic structure for these weather forecasting models was provided by _Dataquest_'s video on the subject. The training and testing data for the models was ordered from NOAA's National Center for Environmental Information. This was 62 years of daily data recorded at Baltimore/Washington International Thurgood Marshall Airport. The scikit-learn Python libary was used to build the random forest models - a regression model for the high and low temp (a continuous numerical value) and a classification model for the precipitation (a category - yes rain or no rain). Hyperparameter tuning was done with scikit-learn's RandomizedSearchCV.

Feature engineering was aimed at best capturing the known patterns of weather. A notable limitation of these models is that they take data only from one location. Ideally, predictions would be made based also on weather data from another station further west. Furthermore, more consideration could be placed on data from different directions in the summer and the winter to account for the changing jet stream. Training the models to also take in this data would not be especially challenging but it would take the project outside of its original scope of depending on data only from my own constructed weather station.

## Fetching Data and Applying the Models to Incoming Data
Fetching data, applying the models, and emailing the report is all done by one Python script. The needed data for making predictions is obtained by making an API call to the Arduino Cloud with the Python "Requests" library. This data is preprocessed in an identical way as the training data was in order to be used by the saved models. After the predictions are made the forecast is then sent to a list of recipients using Python's smtplib library. This whole process is automated using Windows Task Scheduler.
